Blog post about the NumPy 2 release (#219)
scientific-python/blog.scientific-python.org: content/posts/numpy/numpy2/index.md

---
title: "18 years in the Making: NumPy 2.0 Released"
date: 2024-06-16
draft: false
description: "
18 years in the Making: NumPy 2.0 Released
"
tags: ["News", "numpy"]
displayInList: true
author: ["NumPy Developers"]
---

After 18 years since the release of NumPy 1.0, we are thrilled to announce the
launch of NumPy 2.0! This major release marks a significant milestone in the
evolution of NumPy, bringing a wealth of enhancements and improvements to users
and unlocking future developments.

NumPy has improved and evolved over the past 18 years and many old releases had
significant performance, usability, and consistency improvements.
The journey to an actual 2.0 release has been long, and it was difficult to
build the necessary momentum. In part this may be because for a time the idea
of doing a NumPy 2.0 release among the NumPy developers required a revolutionary change with

> rewrites of significant key pieces in the code base. Many of these rewrites and

Reviewer: Maybe something like this following "... past 18 years".

"our  approach to has been to make incremental changes while keeping backward compatibility. The downside of that approach was an accumulation of outdated functions and duplicated functionality. This approach came to an end with the need to make the type system more extendable. The type system is fundamental to NumPy and major changes could not be made incrementally, mixing two different type systems would be a recipe for disaster.  Once the decision to jump the version was made, it was seen as an opportunity to deal with the accumulated technical debt, discard duplicate functionality, improve the API to enable future developments, and make a clean distinction between the public interface and the private implementation details."

Reviewer 2: I like this. It's quite detailed, but I think it's insightful for the reader who has a "was this really really necessary" question in mind. 

I'm not 100% sure it is fully accurate though, since the making the C API for new dtypes was a very late addition to 2.0; there may have been at least an equal amount of "this is getting more and more painful, let's do a big cleanup just once" energy. Even if that's the case, the "two type systems" rationale is cleaner and easy to understand - so I still like it.

@seberg WDYT about this proposed text?

Author: TLDR:  I like the idea also, but happy either way and maybe it needs a slight rephrase because I think both Ralf and I read it maybe not as intended.

---

I had similar thoughts and was thinking about it.  I like the start a lot, but feel talking too much about the type system is only half right.

> since the making the C API for new dtypes was a very late addition 

Making it public has maybe not that much to do with 2.0 itself really.  The only direct relation is that it seems like the right time and `StringDType` helped a bit boost confidence (and probably more...).

OTOH, it is true that e.g. NEP 50 and (even tiny) C-API removals mean that a lot of duplication can now be removed again on the C implementation side (or at least eventually, and some of that is 10+ years old).

> The type system is fundamental to NumPy and major changes could not be made incrementally, mixing two different type systems would be a recipe for disaster

But, @rgommers, I think maybe we misread this and it should refer to NEP 50 user facing behavior and not to the implementation :).
It is not incorrect that NEP 50 was maybe the piece that helped get things moving, since it is so obviously not possible to do this without a major change.

Maybe that can be rephrased (or slightly reordered) to make it more obvious that the behavior change is just as important (or more)?  OTOH, I wonder if then start duplicating the bullet points later.

Reviewer: Yeah, the history is sort of made up as I'm not that familiar with it. Modify as needed.

Author: Adding those two sentences (or replacing some others with it) is fine with me.  For me, this is really more about behavior than the code (and it reads a bit like code).  But that may be me, and the two go at least in part hand-in-hand.

Reviewer 2: I gave it a go - please have a look at the new commit

Reviewer 2: good point, tried to tweak the phrasing and remove parentheses. I wanted to make clear that we didn't change our BC policy permanently

Reviewer 2: Can you resolve the comment @seberg or @charris? I don't have permissions to do so.

---
title: "18 years in the Making: NumPy 2.0 Released"
date: 2024-06-16
draft: false
description: "
18 years in the Making: NumPy 2.0 Released
"
tags: ["News", "numpy"]
displayInList: true
author: ["NumPy Developers"]
---

After 18 years since the release of NumPy 1.0, we are thrilled to announce the
launch of NumPy 2.0! This major release marks a significant milestone in the
evolution of NumPy, bringing a wealth of enhancements and improvements to users

> and unlocks future developments.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and unlocking future developments.
```

to match the tense of the other verb

NumPy 2.x.

We knew when we started the development for 2.0 that rolling out a NumPy 2.0
will be (temporarily) disruptive, because of the backwards-incompatible ABI change
in particular which prevents previously-released wheels of other packages
that use the NumPy C API from working with numpy 2.0 wheels in the PyPI ecosystem.
We spent an extraordinary amount of effort communicating these changes, helping
downstream projects adapt, tracking compatibility of popular open source projects
(see, e.g., [numpy#26191](https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/26191), and
completing the release process at a very mild pace to give everyone enough time
to adapt. No doubt the next few weeks will be slightly rocky still, however
we expect this to be manageable and well worth it in the long run.

While we do require C API users to recompile their projects to support running
with NumPy 2.0, we prepared for this already in NumPy 1.25. The build process was
simplified so that you can now always compile with the latest NumPy version.
This means that projects build with NumPy 2.x are "magically" compatible with
1.x. It also means that projects no longer need to build their binaries using

> the oldest version of NumPy supported by a project.

Author: It's OK, but it feels now a bit much to put this after the other paragraph. 

Maybe swapping the two paragraphs makes sense (use the C "incompatible ABI phrasing from the first there).

Then follow with the "extraordinary amount of effort communicating these changes, which doesn't really need to be C API specific.  (There was also a lot of Python effort, it just stretched a longer time period.)

Reviewer 2: Sounds good. I wasn't quite sure about the order, will swap.

Reviewer 2: done now, please have another look

Author: Looks fine, I was hoping to also shorten it a bit, but no great idea right now.

Author: I guess it is a bit shorter :).

Reviewer 2: Yep, a little:)

Reviewer 2: same here, can you resolve @seberg?

---

> title: "18 years in the Making: NumPy 2.0 Released"

Reviewer 4: If you have a minute or two to think about the title, it'd be good to make it punchy, crisp, and a summary of the announcement here. First thoughts, "NumPy 2.0: 18 years of experience, distilled", "NumPy 2.0: an evolutionary milestone", etc. etc.

Reviewer 2: Agreed, those look better - starting with "NumPy 2.0" is nicer. I'd go for one of the first two ideas here. If I get one vote, it goes to "NumPy 2.0: an evolutionary milestone"

Author: Yeah, those titles are nicer.  Not sure I love the "evolution milestone", but happy with it and have no other idea :).

Reviewer 4: We can generate others: "NumPy 2.0: milestone release brings significant improvements" or "NumPy 2.0: core ecosystem package gets major overhaul".

Reviewer 4: The last one is quite relevant i.t.o. this being published on the ecosystem blog.

Reviewer 2: I like "NumPy 2.0: milestone release brings significant improvements" too. Or "NumPy 2.0: an evolutionary milestone" still. The ecosystem one less so - it's a NumPy blog by the NumPy team after all.

Reviewer 4: Happy with either choice.

Reviewer 2: Pushed "NumPy 2.0: an evolutionary milestone" since it is the one with four people happy with it, and is short/punchy/descriptive.

date: 2024-06-16
draft: false
description: "

> 18 years in the Making: NumPy 2.0 Released

Reviewer 4: Would be good to have a more helpful summary here. When you paste a link to the blog post, most social media sites generate a card with the title + this description.

Reviewer 4: Example text:

We announce the release of NumPy 2.0, which brings major improvements both
to the user API as well as the underlying implementation. We discuss the
motivation behind breaking changes, and how they impact users.

Reviewer 2: Good idea. I tweaked this a bit and pushed something more descriptive.

"
tags: ["News", "numpy"]
displayInList: true
author: ["NumPy Developers"]
---

> After 18 years since the release of NumPy 1.0, we are thrilled to announce the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Eighteen years since the release of NumPy 1.0, we are thrilled to announce the
```

launch of NumPy 2.0! This major release marks a significant milestone in the

> evolution of NumPy, bringing a wealth of enhancements and improvements to users

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
evolution of NumPy, bringing a wealth of enhancements and improvements to users,
```

> and unlocking future developments.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
and opening the door to future growth.
```
Not sure this is the best suggestion, but you want to try and capture what "future developments" means.

Reviewer: > Never use a metaphor, simile, or other figure of speech which you are used to seeing in print. -- Orwell

:)

Reviewer 4: :P To be clear, I'm not advocating for "opening the door" but for clarifying the phrase "future developments". "Unlocking mechanisms for future growth" or "putting in place mechanisms that will facilitate future growth" etc etc. would work just fine.

Reviewer 2: not sure how to interpret these comments - yay or nay?

Reviewer 3: I think I wrote the original text in my editing pass? I like Stefan's reword, Orwell be damned ;)

Reviewer 4: Concrete suggestion:

> and unlocking future developments.

to

> and setting the stage for future feature development.

@charris Your Orwell comment probably applies to stages as well, but that's all I have for now.

Reviewer 2: > and setting the stage for future feature development.

I like this change.

Reviewer: > Orwell be damned ;)

I'm pretty sure he ended up in the first ring :)

> NumPy has improved and evolved over the past 18 years and many old releases had

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
NumPy has improved and evolved over the past 18 years, with many old releases bringing
```

significant performance, usability, and consistency improvements.

> Our approach for a long time has been to make incremental changes while

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
That said, our approach for a long time has been to make only incremental changes while
```

> carefully managing backward compatibility. This approach finally had to come to
> an end, for this one-off major release, with the significant improvements to
> NumPy's type system. The type system is fundamental to NumPy, and major
> behavioral changes could not be made incrementally, since mixing two different
> type systems would be a recipe for disaster.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
carefully managing backward compatibility. This approach minimizes user breakage,
but also limits the scope of improvements that can be made, both to the API and its underlying implementation.
Therefore, for this one-off major release, we are breaking backward compatibility to implement significant improvements in NumPy's type system. The type system is fundamental to NumPy, and major
behavioral changes could not be made incrementally without mixing two different
type systems, which would be a recipe for disaster.
```

The journey to an actual 2.0 release has been long, and it was difficult to

> build the necessary momentum. In part this may be because for a time the idea
> of doing a NumPy 2.0 release among the NumPy developers required a revolutionary change with
> rewrites of significant key pieces in the code base. Many of these rewrites and

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
build the necessary momentum. In part, this may be because, for a time, the NumPy developers associated a NumPy 2.0 release with nothing less than a revolutionary 
rewrite of significant key pieces in the code base. Many of these rewrites and
```

Hope I'm capturing this correctly, but the sentence as is is a bit unclear.

Reviewer 2: This does read better, and I think captures the intent well.

Reviewer 4: Can also probably cut "In part, " to simplify the sentence further.

changes happened over the years, but because of backward compatibility concerns

> they remained largely invisible to the users. NumPy 2.0 is, in part, the
> culmination of these improvements, allowing us to discard some of the legacy
> behaviors or details of the ABI that prevent future improvements.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
they remained largely invisible to the users. NumPy 2.0 is the
culmination of these improvements, allowing us to discard some legacy
ABI (Application Binary Interface) that prevented future improvements.
```

We started concrete plans for the 2.0 release more than a year ago, at a four hour
long [public planning meeting](https://github.com/numpy/archive/tree/main/2.0_developer_meeting)

> in April 2023. Many of the key changes were proposed and discussed. The key goals

Reviewer 4: It would be worth mentioning that the NumPy 2.0 feature planning started in 2019 already, with a significant part of the NumPy grant at BIDS being targeted at doing the footwork for the dtype refactoring and other related API cleanups. I think the above is correct in that the "NumPy 2.0" notion was only floated in 2023, but as described in the paragraphs above it is the culmination of a lot of other pieces of work.

Reviewer 2: I'd prefer to not call out one grant or group in particular here. Some ideas went back much further (e.g., C API cleanups), some others came in only last year (e.g., Python API cleanup), some started in another place (e.g., array API standard started in 2020). NASA, CZI EOSS (2x) were also major grants, as were direct support from Quansight and NVIDIA.

Reviewer 2: Re timelines: we could say something like "Some of the key features of this release and major changes to core NumPy machinery have been in the works for much longer, since 2019 at least". Would that work?

Reviewer 4: Agreed that we don't need to call out specific grants (or, if we do, that we need to call out all). We just need the timeline to align with the work that happened.

Reviewer 4: Or just "have been in the works since 2019 or even earlier."

Author: Calling out the grant could just be calling out the "first" grant, also.  No strong opinion, for me the April meeting isn't really the starting gun either, just the "formalizing" step.  (Not sure when a rough consenus slowly formed on it, I expect it was in the second half of 2022, really)

Reviewer 2: I pushed a sentence. Added it as the first sentence in this paragraph - better than in the middle, because that breaks the flow of the story in this paragraph. Does that look good?

we decided on there were perhaps even larger and more ambitious in scope than
some of us expected. This also unlocked some extra energy - which has been great to see.
After the meeting and over the course of the last year, NumPy enhancement

> proposals ([NEPs](https://numpy.org/neps/)) for each major change were written,
> reviewed, and implemented.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
proposals ([NEPs](https://numpy.org/neps/)) were written,
reviewed, and implemented for each major change.
```

> Some of the key highlights and major changes are:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Some key highlights are:
```

- Cleaned-up and streamlined Python API ([NEP 52](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0052-python-api-cleanup.html)):
  The Python API has undergone a thorough cleanup, making it easier to learn
  and use NumPy. The main namespace has been reduced by approximately 10%, and
  the more niche `numpy.lib` namespace has been reduced by about 80%, providing
  a clearer distinction between public and private API elements.

- Improved scalar promotion rules: The scalar promotion rules have been
  updated, as proposed in [NEP 50](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0050-scalar-promotion.html)

>   addressing surprising behaviors in type promotion e.g. with zero dimensional arrays.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  addressing surprising behaviors in type promotion, e.g. with zero dimensional arrays.
```

- Powerful new DType API and a new string dtype: NumPy 2.0 introduces a new API
  for implementing user-defined custom data types as proposed by
  [NEP 41](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0041-improved-dtype-support.html). We used
  this new API to implement `StringDType`, offering efficient and painless
  support for variable length strings which was proposed in
  [NEP 55](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0055-string_dtype.html). And it is our hope
  that enable future new data types with interesting new capabilities in the
  PyData ecosystem and in NumPy itself.

> - Windows compatibility enhancements: The default 32-bit integer representation
>   on Windows has been updated to 64-bit on 64-bit architectures, addressing one
>   of the most common issues a developer runs into trying to get NumPy code to
>   work portably on Windows and Unix-like operating systems.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Windows compatibility enhancements: The default 32-bit integer representation
  on Windows has been updated to 64-bit on 64-bit architectures, addressing one
  of the most common problems with having NumPy work portably across operating
  systems.
```

> - Full support for the Python array API standard: This is the first release to
>   include full support for the array API standard (v2022.12), which was enabled
>   by the promotion rules and API cleanup mentioned above, as well as by
>   adding new APIs and aligning existing APIs and behavior with the standard,
>   as proposed by [NEP 56](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0056-array-api-main-namespace.html).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Support for the Python array API standard: This is the first release to
  include full support for the array API standard (v2022.12), made possible
  by the new promotion rules, APIs, and API cleanup mentioned above.
  We also aligned existing APIs and behavior with the standard,
  as proposed in [NEP 56](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0056-array-api-main-namespace.html).
```

I tried to keep the meaning the same here, but to streamline the wording, since there were a lot of joined sub-sentences.

These are just some of the more impactful changes in behavior and usability. In addition,

> NumPy 2.0 contains significant performance improvements, large documentation improvements,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
NumPy 2.0 contains significant performance and documentation improvements,
```

> and more much - for a more extensive list of changes, see

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
and more much - for an extensive list of changes, see
```

the [NumPy 2 release notes](https://numpy.org/devdocs/release/2.0.0-notes.html).

> A major release comes with changes that users may have to adapt to, but we
> worked hard to strike a balance between improvements and ensuring that the
> transition to NumPy 2.0 is as seamless as possible. We wrote a comprehensive

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To adopt this major release, users will likely need to adjust existing code, but we
worked hard to strike a balance between improvements and ensuring that the
transition to NumPy 2.0 is as seamless as possible. We wrote a comprehensive
```

[migration guide](https://numpy.org/devdocs/numpy_2_0_migration_guide.html),
and a [ruff plugin](https://numpy.org/devdocs/numpy_2_0_migration_guide.html#ruff-plugin)

> helps to automatically update Python code so it will work with both NumPy 1.x and

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
that helps to update Python code so it will work with both NumPy 1.x and
```

NumPy 2.x.

> 

Reviewer 4: May be worth inserting here "Over the past few months, we've upgraded many libraries in the scientific Python ecosystem, which increases our confidence that the migration is feasible." Or, if you want to make it more positive, "Over the past few months, we've upgraded many libraries in the scientific Python ecosystem, and in that process have hopefully ironed out most of the major wrinkles."

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure this is necessary to add. Both versions sound like we're not sure that things will work - but we are.

Reviewer 4: Ah, OK, so what I wanted to communicate was that we've migrated many libraries, not that we're uncertain it will work. Basically: we've done the work, there should be no issues. But I think it says something about the team that they went out and did those ports.

Reviewer 2: Sounds good, but isn't that already the "helping downstream projects adapt" further down?

Reviewer 4: Yes, it is mentioned there too, so OK to skip for now.

> While we do require C API users to recompile their projects to support running
> with NumPy 2.0, we prepared for this already in NumPy 1.25. The build process was

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
While we do require C API users to recompile their projects to support
NumPy 2.0, we prepared for this in NumPy 1.25 already. The build process was
```

> simplified so that you can now always compile with the latest NumPy version.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
simplified so that you can now compile with the latest NumPy version,
and remain baskward compatible.
```

Reviewer 2: typo "baskward", so I can't apply this suggestion, nor can I edit it in the UI

Reviewer 4: updated

This means that projects build with NumPy 2.x are "magically" compatible with
1.x. It also means that projects no longer need to build their binaries using

> the oldest version of NumPy supported by a project.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the oldest supported version of NumPy.
```

> We knew when we started the development for 2.0 that rolling out a NumPy 2.0

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We knew throughout development that rolling out NumPy 2.0
```

> will be (temporarily) disruptive, because of the backwards-incompatible API and

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
would be (temporarily) disruptive, because of the backwards-incompatible API and
```

> ABI changes. We spent an extraordinary amount of effort communicating these

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
ABI changes. We made a concerted effort to communicate these
```

Reviewer 2: I'd prefer keeping the original phrasing, since I'd say it was a lot more than what "concerted effort" implies to me. We really went out of our way here and did a crazy amount of work on this - and not just by NumPy maintainers, but with other folks from for example RAPIDS and conda-forge joining in and making major testing, outreach and migration efforts proactively.

Reviewer 4: That's totally fine; I'll resolve this then.

Author: Yeah, it's fair to say it was extraordinary.  It isn't typical that projects inform large set of downstram in issus explicitly :).

changes, helping downstream projects adapt, tracking compatibility of popular
open source projects (see, e.g.,
[numpy#26191](https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/26191), and completing the

> release process at a very mild pace to give everyone enough time to adapt. No

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
release process at limited pace to provide time for adoption. No
```

Both adoption and adaption work here, but adoption may be more intuitive in the context.

> doubt the next few weeks will be slightly rocky still, however we expect this

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
doubt, the next few weeks will bring to light some new challenges, however we fully expect these
```

to be manageable and well worth it in the long run.

> The release of NumPy 2.0 is the result of a collaborative and largely volunteer
> effort spanning many years and involving contributions from a diverse community
> of developers. In addition, many of the changes above would not have been

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The NumPy 2.0 release is the result of a collaborative, largely volunteer,
effort spanning many years and involving contributions from a diverse community
of developers. In addition, many of the changes above would not have been
```

> possible without funders and institutional sponsors enabling quite a few of us
> to work on NumPy as part of our day jobs. We'd like to acknowledge in particular:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
possible without funders and institutional sponsors allowing several team members
to work on NumPy as part of their day jobs. We'd like to acknowledge in particular:
```

the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation,

> NASA, NVIDIA, Quansight Labs, the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, and Tidelift.

Reviewer 4: It is great to see how these groups & sources of funding came together :heart:

We are excited about future improvements to NumPy, many of which will be
possible due to changes in NumPy 2.0. See [the NumPy roadmap](https://numpy.org/neps/roadmap.html)

> for some of the things that are in the pipeline or on the wishlist. Let's

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
for some features in the pipeline or on the wishlist. Let's
```

> continue to work together to improve NumPy and the scientific Python and PyData

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
continue working together to improve NumPy and the scientific Python and PyData
```

---
title: "18 years in the Making: NumPy 2.0 Released"
date: 2024-06-16
draft: false
description: "
We announce the release of NumPy 2.0, which brings major improvements in

> functionality and usability. Improvements to NumPy internals sets the stage

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
functionality and usability. Improvements to NumPy internals set the stage
```

evolution of NumPy, bringing a wealth of enhancements and improvements to users,
and setting the stage for future feature development.

NumPy has improved and evolved over the past 18 years, with many old releases bringing
significant performance, usability, and consistency improvements.
That said, our approach for a long time has been to make only incremental changes while
carefully managing backward compatibility. This approach minimizes user breakage,
but also limits the scope of improvements that can be made, both to the API and its underlying implementation.
Therefore, for this one-off major release, we are breaking backward compatibility to implement significant improvements in NumPy's type system. The type system is fundamental to NumPy, and major
behavioral changes could not be made incrementally without mixing two different
type systems, which would be a recipe for disaster.

The journey to an actual 2.0 release has been long, and it was difficult to
build the necessary momentum. In part, this may be because, for a time, the NumPy developers associated a NumPy 2.0 release with nothing less than a revolutionary 

> rewrite of significant key pieces in the code base. Many of these rewrites and

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
rewrite of significant key pieces of the code base. Many of these rewrites and
```

changes happened over the years, but because of backward compatibility concerns
they remained largely invisible to the users. NumPy 2.0 is the

> culmination of these improvements, allowing us to discard some legacy

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
culmination of these efforts, allowing us to discard some legacy
```

(remove double use of improvement; could also modify second instance below).

ABI (Application Binary Interface) that prevented future improvements.

> Some major changes to NumPy internals that were required for key features in
> 2.0 have been in the works since 2019 at least.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Some major changes to NumPy internals—required for key features in
2.0—have been in the works since 2019 at least.
```

Could also use commas, but I slightly prefer the em-dashes.

> We started concrete plans for the 2.0 release itself more than a year ago, at a four hour

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We started concrete plans for the 2.0 release more than a year ago, at a four hour
```

NumPy has improved and evolved over the past 16 years and many old releases had significant performance, understandability, and consistency improvements.
The journey to an actual 2.0 release has been long and it was difficult to build the necessary momentum. In part this may be because for a time the idea of a NumPy 2 among the NumPy developers required a revolutionary change with a large code rewrite.
Many of these rewrites and changes happened over the years, but because of backward compatibility concerns they remained largely invisible to the users and NumPy 2 is in part, just the culmination of these improvements, allowing us to discard some of the legacy behaviors or details of the ABI that prevent future improvements.

We started concrete plans for the 2.0 release more than a year ago at a [public planning meeting](https://github.com/numpy/archive/tree/main/2.0_developer_meeting) in April 2023 where many of the below changes were proposed and discussed. After the meeting and over the course of the last year, NumPy enhancement proposals ([NEPs](https://numpy.org/neps/)) written, reviewed, and implemented.

Some of the key highlights and major changes are:

> - Cleaned-up and Streamlined API ([NEP 54](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0052-python-api-cleanup.html)): The Python API has undergone a thorough cleanup, making it easier to learn and use NumPy. The main namespace has been reduced by approximately 10%, and the more niche `numpy.lib` namespace has been reduced by about 80%, providing a clearer distinction between public and private API elements.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Cleaned-up and Streamlined API ([NEP 52](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0052-python-api-cleanup.html)): The Python API has undergone a thorough cleanup, making it easier to learn and use NumPy. The main namespace has been reduced by approximately 10%, and the more niche `numpy.lib` namespace has been reduced by about 80%, providing a clearer distinction between public and private API elements.
```

Reviewer 2: included

- Improved Scalar Promotion Rules: The scalar promotion rules have been updated, as proposed in [NEP 50](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0050-scalar-promotion.html) addressing surprising behaviors in type promotion e.g. with zero dimensional arrays.

- Powerful new DType API and a new string dtype: NumPy 2.0 introduces a new API for implementing user-defined custom data types as proposed by [NEP 41](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0041-improved-dtype-support.html). We used this new API to implement `StringDType` offering efficient and painless support for variable length strings which was proposed in [NEP 55](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0055-string_dtype.html). And it is our hope that enable future DTypes in PyData ecosystem and NumPy itself.

- Windows Compatibility Enhancements: The default 32-bit integer representation on Windows has been updated to 64-bit on 64 bit architectures, addressing one of the most common issues a developer runs into trying to get NumPy code to work portably on Windows and Unix-like operating systems.

> 

Reviewer 5: Maybe as a separate bullet point we can mention NEP 56 (https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0056-array-api-main-namespace.html), implementing Array API support and running full `array-api-tests` suite in the CI?

Reviewer 2: Yes, I'd like to mention full array API support with NEP 56. Running test suite is too detailed I'd say. Adding it now.

Reviewer 2: done now

developments.

NumPy has improved and evolved over the past 18 years and many old releases had
significant performance, understandability, and consistency improvements.
The journey to an actual 2.0 release has been long and it was difficult to
build the necessary momentum. In part this may be because for a time the idea
of a NumPy 2 among the NumPy developers required a revolutionary change with a
large code rewrite. Many of these rewrites and changes happened over the years,
but because of backward compatibility concerns they remained largely invisible
to the users and NumPy 2 is in part, just the culmination of these
improvements, allowing us to discard some of the legacy behaviors or details of
the ABI that prevent future improvements.

We started concrete plans for the 2.0 release more than a year ago at a
[public planning meeting](https://github.com/numpy/archive/tree/main/2.0_developer_meeting)
in April 2023 where many of the below changes were proposed and discussed.
After the meeting and over the course of the last year, NumPy enhancement
proposals ([NEPs](https://numpy.org/neps/)) written, reviewed, and implemented.

Some of the key highlights and major changes are:

> - Cleaned-up and Streamlined API ([NEP 54](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0052-python-api-cleanup.html)):

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Cleaned-up and Streamlined API ([NEP 52](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0052-python-api-cleanup.html)):
```

Reviewer 2: fixed

Reviewer 2: can you resolve this comment?

A major release comes with changes that users may have to adapt to, but we
worked hard to strike a balance between improvements and ensuring that the
transition to NumPy 2.0 is as seamless as possible. We wrote a comprehensive
[migration guide](https://numpy.org/devdocs/numpy_2_0_migration_guide.html),
and a [ruff plugin](https://numpy.org/devdocs/numpy_2_0_migration_guide.html#ruff-plugin)

> helps to automatically update Python code so it will work with both NumPy 1.x and

Reviewer 5: Yes, `ruff` offers auto-updating changes and it's pretty useful for NumPy 2.0 Python API changes, as it's mostly replacing one API member with another one.
https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/settings/#fix The codebase update can be done with `--fix` cmd option or in the configuration file.

> helps to automatically update Python code so it will work with both NumPy 1.x and

Reviewer 2: and this one too

NumPy 2.x.

We knew when we started the development for 2.0 that rolling out a NumPy 2.0
will be (temporarily) disruptive, because of the backwards-incompatible ABI change

> in particular which prevents previously-released wheels of other packages

Reviewer 2: I am fairly sure that the ABI change will end up being the most disruptive, by some distance - it already has been over the past months. For a few projects it'll be NEP 50 (Numba, CuPy), for a few it'll be a C API change, for end users with pure Python code it's both adapting to some Python-level changes as well as to ABI breakage (since they're going to have to manually do quite a bit of dependency management).

But no point arguing about it - if you don't like it, let's change it. I'll push a tweak in a minute.
